Hey folks. You're a very
good developer, probably regardless. You
do write bugs. That's unavoidable.
What is affordable is wasting
time trying to track down
the cause of those bugs
century.io provides full stack error
tracking that lets you monitor
and fix problems. In real
time, you can see the
severity and the scope of
the error. Get immediate access
to the stack, trace connect
the problem to the commit
that caused it and fix
it without delay century. It's
a name so common that
they have to include the
top level domain in their
advertising to make sure you
remember it. century.io, that century
dot I O open source,
full stack web apps, native
apps, mobile games, smart oven
mitts. If you can program
it, they can make it
far easier to fix any
errors you encounter with it.
Your code may be broken.
Let's fix it together. Visit
century.io. . Hi, this is
Scott Hanselman. This is another
episode of Hanselminutes today. I'm
talking to Febby on SoundCloud,
who has written a wonderful
book called the game engine.
Blackbook for doom. And I'm
sitting here with this book
in front of me, filled
with highlights. I've been reading
this book and highlighting so
many pages and I'm so
excited to chat with you
today, sir. Oh, thank you
for having me. This is
such an interesting idea. You've
written both the game engine
black book for doom, and
then previously wrote one for
Wolfenstein three D and I
was, my wife saw me
reading this yesterday and she
said, are you studying? Because
she saw diagrams and photographs
and full color and code
and, and she thought it
was studying for some kind
of a test. And I
was telling her what a
joy it was to explore
the last 25 years of
doom. I'm glad, I'm glad
you enjoyed it. That's exactly.
That's part of why I
wrote it. Part of it
was a nostalgia and allow
people to leave again, that,
that era. So this is
a doom is 25 years
old this year, is it?
Yeah. On December 10th of this
year, I turned 25 years
old. It was raised on
December 10th, 1993. And you have written
a, an over 400 page
full color book as if
I may a love letter
to, to doom, to CarMax,
to the, to everyone that
worked on this project. It's,
it's extraordinary. This must have
taken a very long time.
No, actually this one, this
one went pretty fast. I
wrote it pretty much in
six months. Then I, I
left it and touched for
a while too, so I
could proofread it with new
eyes and it was a
pretty fast pace. It's a
love radio, but it's also
thank you later for all
what I've learned or what
I've been able to do
with the source code And
or what is game as
brought to my life. That's
amazing that you're, that you're
saying that you, it was
a pretty quick, right? Because
I, I, I don't want
people to think, Oh, he,
he wrote this book in
six months and it must,
you know, a year there's
so much detail. Why was
it easy to write? Was
it just because it floated
out Review? One of the
reason is that first of
all, I had all the
tools really, before that day
we wrote a book about
warfare string 3d. This one
was a hell. I gave
up three times over the
course of three years, trying
to make it happen. It
was very difficult. This one,
it was like a really
well set up a framework
and all of the content,
pretty much I had it
in my head because I've
been writing about doom. Some
of the technique used in
the game like binary space,
petition TechSoup mapping and all
those things. So it wasn't
really, really hard. And especially
because it also followed the
same structure as the first
book, which is first has
described the environment, the hardware.
And then I described the
team and the tools they
built and finally a dive
in to the code and
the engine. So that was
pretty easy in comparison to
the previous one. And you'd
put together your own production
pipeline, because this is a
self published book that you
wrote in latex. Yeah, everything
was right in by hand
with Lennox, sibling, text editor,
and escape for the drawings.
That's fantastic. One of the
things that I was a
little surprised about when I
had my expectations, when I
bought it, was that there
would be, I would be
reading code within the first
page, but interestingly, there's almost
a hundred pages of, of
context. This isn't a book
about code. It's a book
about history, about teams, about
schedules. Yes, it's very important.
So that's something that was
even more vivid when I
wanted to talk about what
Finch thing is that even
though you had the source
code, if you don't know
about what was the hardware,
what was the constraint at
the time? It means almost
nothing. So that's why I
spent a lot of time
describing everything. So without being
too technical, for example, the
46 was a new CPU
at the time that was
using Acacia cash line technology
to make things faster. And
if you, if you're not
aware of that, when you
ring the doom source code,
anyway, things are organized the
way they are. You don't
really understand why it's done
this way. That's so important
to point out because people
who were, who may not
have been around or been
aware of this in 1989
to 1992, there was a
lot of happening with floating
point processors and the SX
versus DX 46, the decisions
that the doom team would
have needed to make, they
could have found themselves without
a processor to run their
app, or they would have
made the, you know, they
would have targeted the wrong
instruction set and put themselves
in a bad situation. Absolutely.
Yeah. I agree with that.
And it's even more important
to know a day where
I feel like a developer
as more mine, more remote
from the hardware. Typically, if
you, if you write something
in JavaScript on Chrome, you're
running inside of VM, which
is a process on top
of an operating system. And
even that is sometime virtualized
somehow. And we're so far
remote that we don't really
factor in the limitation. Sometime
we program and assume we
have limitless limitless resources like
infinite CP power or infinite
Ram. Whereas when you program
in this era for doom
and one French 10, you
had to have specific budgets
in term of Ram in
terms of CPU cycle, you
were willing to spend on
different parts of the rendering
pipeline. Yeah. It's that working
within constraints. It's a very
different type of programming thinking
about memory, but not just
that thinking about how many
processor instructions thinking about ticks.
They had a series of
constraints that they decided upon.
They said, this has to
work in four megs of
Ram. You know, they had
minimum specs. One of the
things I thought was interesting
was you said that there
was a controversial decision about
the number of ticks that
they could work within, that
allowed them to achieve some
things, but also caused them
problems later. What was that
controversial decision? Oh, so is
a, hard-coded the frame rate
at 35 Hertz. And so
later on, he led to
a problem that if any,
if your machine can render
a 70 frame per second,
because the ward only update
that's 35 Hertz, you only
see 35 movement per, per,
per second. So that solved
a lot of the issues
because you could play the
game on any computer and
at the same world ticks.
But later on, when Pentium
came out, which were most
Fest on machine, they could
not really run out of
the food potential because they
were limited. So the idea
that you would somehow get
a faster machine and get
four times more frame rate,
or, you know, four times
more, what something, it didn't,
it didn't scale in the
way that we think of
modern game engine scaling in
the sense of scaling up.
But it did scale down
extraordinarily. It did scale down
and it did scale, but
to a certain extent, because
if any, when they released
the game, no one machine
could run as 35 Hertz.
So must machine, well running
a 20 so later on
pension were about to reach
certify, which was still very
pleased, pleasant visually. But even
now, today, when you look
at a model, you can
games, you can have games
running at a thousand frames
per second, but even the
money tall, the display is
going to remain at 60
or sure. Lucky, 120. So
you still have a limiting
factor. That's right. That's right.
One of the things I
also thought was interesting, and
I love that you actually
found use net posts from
1994 with people, and you
included their actual emails arguing
about whether or not doom
ran faster with a floating
point coprocessor on a 46
DX or an ESX. And
there was a lot, even
then on the internet, there's
a lot of fake news.
No one, no one could
decide whether it was better
with this process or a
better with that one. Yeah.
I wouldn't make me call
it fake news because it's
nothing intentional of credit. It's
so representative of the era,
I know how hard it
was to access the information.
John Carmack mentions it later
on in the book, when
he was doing computer graphics
research, he has very, very
little access to resources and
everything was limited. Back in
the days, we are almost
the same age. And maybe
you try to program back
in the nineties, a compiler
was a thousand dollars. It
was something really hard to
access. So information, even the
tuning was how to access
The, the idea that tooling
was how to access. It
looks when you look at
the historical context here, it
almost makes me wonder how
we got anything done. You
actually include a, a table
of prices and you are
kind enough to show us
what it would cost to
buy computers. Now, some of
the workstations that they were
using would be 12 or
$15,000 today, but I can't
imagine someone tolerating that kind
of to buy a computer
today. Well, you know, I'm
pretty sure in 20 years,
people are gonna say the
same thing about now. And
it's true for all time
periods. Some people would say,
we're crazy to buy phones
at our thousand dollars yet.
We still do. Mm that's
true. That's true. They, they
were targeting ultimately to start
the PC, which was a
business machine. So they had
the challenge of graphics cards
and a machine that was
used to pushing text around
to start pushing graphics around,
but they didn't develop on
the PC. Right? No, as
they did not develop on
a PC, that was one
of the big decisions they
made self-aware as they actually
developed everything on next workstation,
which was manufactured by my
next company created by Steve
jobs in 1989. And this
was a, you know, a
real workstation, this was a
revolutionary computer. This is one
of the computers that a
lot of historians feel like
it should have succeeded in
taking over the world. But
it didn't, even though it's,
you can find it's it's
influencing code even on the
iPhone today. Well, yes, I
D I actually disagree. I
think it failed and rightfully
so because it was, Oh,
I think you'd always have
a price. The operating system
was gorgeous, so many innovation
and it worked very well
and he still still walks
because it's at the heart
of microwaves now. But I
think maybe Steve jobs in
his quest for perfection, I
think on this one, he
probably took it too far.
Yeah. A and 12, $12,000
in 1991 was a nontrivial
amount of money for a
next year Cube, especially when
you should consider it could
only render for Carlos. Actually
it would only rent out
black, white, and two shades
of gray, but it was
so high resolution. It was
very high resolution, but I
don't know. I think it's
very interesting. The chosen he
made. So to write his
book actually acquired an external
colo station. Really? Oh yeah.
I wanted to experience the,
the, the, the real pipeline,
how long it took to
compile ho it was to,
to code on this machine.
And what surprised me is
that it's not surely able
to run random properly. If
you start, if you start
doom on the next station,
it's gonna run a 10
frame per second. So really
once it got out of
the next station was the
stability of the, the TextEdit
or the off object you
see, because developing the tools
was much faster, but it
was a at first sight,
it's not abuse that it's
going to be a machine
done to develop first person
shooter. I was impressed at
you. And you, you include
some screenshots that are like,
you must have taken them
yourself that show the, you
know what, it, would've looked
like to develop it on
dos at, you know, 80
by 25 or 80 by
50. And then you put
it next to what it
looks like on next it's,
it's almost as if they,
they picked the next simply
because they wanted to see
more lines of code in
the screen, which I know
is an oversimplification To some
extent. It's true. The main
reason to come back mention
is that he didn't crash
all the time. Reportedly we'd
lose all his work several
times a day. And back
in the day 82, I
did not save it to
magically. So imagine yourself, working
on an algorithm for an
hour and losing it all,
I can see why they
were motivated to change. Today's
sponsor is tiny technologies. If
you're a developer who needs
to build beautiful writing experiences
for your end users, then
check out tiny. You may
recognize the name. Tiny MCE
is the rich text editing
platform that helped launch and
scale startups like medium and
WordPress. And it LaSeon. And
it's used by thousands of
businesses like IBM, Adobe Intel,
the NASDAQ visa, and the
list goes on. They enable
10,000 active applications and hosts
1 million users on the tiny
cloud. They also recently launched
a cloud asset management system
called tiny drive, and they
will soon release a rearchitected
UI called tiny MCE five
to meet the needs of
today's content creators. So go
check out tiny.cloud/hanselman for a
free 30 day trial of
their premium offerings. That's tiny.cloud/hanselman.
So you, you describe in
great detail, the pipeline here.
It's interesting that they are
building on a Motorola, but
they're targeting an Intel. So
they even, the, the ND
in this is different between
the two processors. Yeah. The
everything was different on those.
You had access to the
hardware on next. You had
to use a whatever frameworks
we're using. You cannot access
the screen directly. Same thing
for the keyboard. The timer
is not the same. Everything
is different that worked to
the drums advantages in a
long time, because there is
a, the way do me
structure is that there is
a core and you have
subsystem, which are very cleanly,
layered. There is, there are
no layer of violations. So
to get out or to
get in, you have to
go through those subsidized system.
Everything is very clearly defined.
And that's why I do
more so easy to portlet
around towards M platform. Because
the only work you have
to do is to rewrite
a Steiny subsystem and all
the remaining core remain an
effective. So it was very
much an example of a
single responsibility principle. Yeah. It's
interesting that on the first
preface where you get there
and John Carmack, his first
sentence is that doom was
almost, or effectively the perfect,
the perfect game. And I
thought to myself, Oh, that's
a little bit egotistical, but
then you read the book
and you go, well, it
kind of was the perfect
schedule, perfect storm per I
mean like just the whole
team came together to make
something that, you know, while
it's shipped with a bugger
to has held up 25
years later as really just
the perfect game. I agree
with that. I don't think
it's, I'm showing up if
annual general Ramiro wrote in
his interview, that the game
turned out exactly the way
you want it. And the
game felt very solid, very
fast. The engine was yeah.
Close to perfection. I would
say to me, it's the
best games ever produced.
I wonder if people today,
if my kids, if people
who are in their twenties
are people who are younger
than doom is what they
will experience that will cause
them to have that kind
of, that visceral feeling in
their chest. Like, Oh my
goodness. Like when I saw
Wolf and Stein, you could
have knocked me over with
a feather and then doom
the, the walls were not
just square. I mean, it
was so unbelievable. We hadn't
seen anything like it. What
is the next thing for
that? When it in 2020
or 2025, that's going to
knock over my son or
my daughter with a feather.
I'm not sure it's going
to be based on technology.
I think that a lot
of good games, the design
is much more important. Now
I think we are reaching
a point where the graphic
is not really improving anymore.
Maybe it will come to
VR personality. I have a
hard time with VR because
I get motion sickness. Yeah.
It's really hard to tell
where it's going to go.
What's remarkable though, is that
to me still enjoyable now
today, the technology is obsolete,
but the game play is
still there. It's still face
space game with a lot
of secret. And that's the
genius of the designer of
the game. And you've spent
some time talking about how
they design the levels, how
much work was put into
it. And if you look
at the, the amount of
work spent on doom dot
exe versus the wad files,
the, you know, where's all
the data files. It really
is kind of, is it
the first example of an
engine with that? You could
then create unlimited content with
No, we've all finished to
us already, already an engine.
It was just much harder
to access. I don't think
they were as open as
aware were we've we've Wharf.
When did they? So what
fan made we've Wolfenstein, Zay
intentionally created an archives farm
outs, which would be easy
to modify. And if any
interim house press release the
premise, an open game where
they will publish the specs
of the assets format And
they publish the source code
just a few years later,
four years after it came
out, this is so innovative.
These are the kinds of
things people do now. And
in 20, in the 2010s,
the 20 fifteens to be
doing that 25 years ago,
to be that progressive and
thoughtful with your code, with
your assets and with your
data format is, is extraordinary.
That was extraordinary. And to
me, that's the true spirit
of people who, who love
programming. You, you share what
you know, and you're, you
just don't keep it. You
don't keep it for yourself.
There is a Johnny Carmack
in his early days, when
he was writing plans, he
was often quoting the right
thing to do, which come
from a book hackers and
releasing the source code to
hold the people loved. It
was really the right thing
to do. Yeah. Somewhere in
the middle of the book,
when we start talking about
to 3d renderer, you make
the, you make the kind
of comment that they had
a contract to while they
were in the middle of
making doom. They're going to
go in port Wolfen Stein
to, to super Nintendo, which
is a very, very small
under powered machine. And they
kind of forgot about it.
And then they went, Oh,
crap. The deadline is soon.
We need to do that.
So they stop working on
doom. They run over, start
working on this ness and
realize that their original algorithms
are not going to cut
it. And you had made
the comment about how now
we just, you know, we
go on Google or overflow
back then you have to
order research papers and have
them delivered and get copies
of papers to, to figure
out if there's a solution
to your technical problem. Yeah.
And in DISA current, actually,
it's not even in a
book. I think he found
a solution. It was on
a VHS, a recording of
some graphic computer graphics convention,
or something like that. Oh,
wow. So he was watching
Bruce, Bruce, Naylor's talk at
a conference and then ordered
his bell labs paper and
learned about BSPs. Maybe you
could speak a little bit
about what a BSP is
and why it's so significant.
So BSP spends for Benares
space petition, and it's a
very efficient way to sort
the ward. So once you,
you, you, you pre-process the
ward and you're going to
repeatedly slice it in half
until everything is convex. Meaning
that from any point you
can see every other point
in, in this area. And
once you have that, it's,
it's very easy to render
back to front or front
to back. And that's, that
was the key of the
entire engine. So everything is
convict. So nothing is, open-ended
nothing, everything folds in on
itself as opposed to opens
out. And then you Trop
everything up in the level.
You actually have wonderful graphics
where you show the progression
from the level editor until
the convex Leafs to show
the creation of the first
episode and the first map
and why that's so important.
I was actually able to
explain it to my nontechnical
spouse, who is not a
programmer, and they had no
trouble understanding why that was
an important optimization. Well, that's,
that's the goal of, of
the book. When I first
got into computer graphics, I
had a very hard time
to, to understand BSPs and
Oak trees and all those
complicated barbaric technique. So yeah,
I think to some extent
I wrote the book, I
wish I could have just
been chased. It's interesting that
this is so important. It
really comes down to that
constraint that we talked about
at the beginning, it takes
11 minutes to go and
process all of this ahead
of time for the 30
maps of doom. So they're
basically, you know, they're pre
chewing their food so that
the end user's computer doesn't
have to do all of
that chewing itself. Yeah. So
this pre processing was quite
a, I knowing for designers
because we've often stains, they
would, they would just draw
the map and instantly jump
into the game to see
how it worked. And all
of the sudden they had
a delay between the time
they finished the map and
they could actually test it.
So, and that became even
worse with quick, they keep
on adding more and more
pre-processing, but that was the
only way seemingly to make
it work. They also Were
very innovative in their, in
their use of subpixels had
that been used before this
time. I'm not sure it
had been used according to
John Carmack. It was not
widely used if any, One
of the things that John
Carmack says that I thought
was so funny was that
because he was effectively disconnected,
right? The internet was, was
FIDOnet and CompuServe and email
between universities at the time,
you couldn't just go and
Google something that he would
find himself all alone working
in a, in a vacuum,
he would create something like,
you know, LZ, LCW compression,
and then discover that, Oh,
well, that was also created
by this person and this
person and this person. Yeah.
And I think that illustrate
how silly patents are. You
can rediscover something dependently, eh,
we've actually stealing it for,
for, from somebody. Yeah. The,
the, the first example, of
course, being the light bulb
where it's the person that
got there first who gets
all of the glory and
the other one is forgotten
to history. Yeah. Sadly. Yeah.
I also appreciated that, that
this book was very inclusive
and that it didn't force
me to think about math.
I didn't really get into
a equations and tell about
200 pages in. And even
then they were, they were
somewhat straightforward to understand. I
was worried there was going
to be a lot of
math. Yeah. So that's because
my brain is allergic to
mathematic. I wish it wasn't.
I tried to build up
the strengths education in France
is very strongly focused on
mathematic. And it was a
difficult time for me. And
I try to explain things
with drawings because as soon
as I see a mathematic
formula, I try to step
back and I wish it
wasn't that way, but I
believe there are many people
like me. So maybe, maybe
that's why they like the
book One of them. And
I appreciate that as well.
So do you think that
this is an important book
for, for, for young people
to read for people who
are, you know, who just
pick up unreal and then
make a game, you know,
and don't think about the
shoulders of the giants that
they're standing on. I think,
I think people just want
to make a game. It's
a bit of a fusing
their time deepening their knowledge
of unreal. The archery reason
why this book exists. The
main reason is that one,
I wanted to preserve history.
I wanted people to be
able to go to doom
source code and understand everything.
We, the context, the second
is that I wanted to
make sure I understood the
book doing code very well.
And the best way to,
to make sure you understand
something well is to try
to explain it to somebody.
And the selfish reason was
that I wanted to write
a book for people who
are in the game industry.
As I mentioned earlier, where
they can get from this
book is the spirit of
texts to achieve greatness. And
it's not a secret. It's
just a lot of Ottawa
and be hopeful and believing
in yourself. One of the,
two of the fun things
that I liked particularly about
the book was that as
I get towards the end,
and I'm wondering where you're
going with this, and we
get into the great graphics
and you talk about high
and low detail mode, then
you spend a really, a
nontrivial amount of time talking
about the ports. Once the
PC version succeeds, they spend
basically three years porting it
to six major systems from
the Jaguar to the super
Nintendo. And like you point
out doom runs on watches.
It runs anywhere like it's,
it's almost the first thing
you port when you make
a new machine. Yeah. So
originally I was not going
to talk about the console
part. I just, and then
I started to look into
it and every single port
has a very interesting story.
The Jaguar is very, was
done by John Carmack and
Dave Taylor. So it's interesting
to see how they work
together, but then later on,
you can see the, the
treaty of pot, which was
a complete failure to see
all of the backstory that
went to, to it, or
the PlayStation port, which nearly
was a disaster. And they
managed to turn it around
and make it the best
part ever. This, the history
of each pot was so
rich and the hardware was
so interesting that I thought
it had to be in
the book. Yeah. I mean,
just as I've learned how
they go and render this
2.5, you know, not quite
3d, but 2.5 D world,
I'm trying to understand how
they, everything is thought about.
And then suddenly we're talking
about triangles and doing things
a totally different way. Cause
they rewrote the engine for
different systems because that's how
the game, the hardware makers
insisted that they do it
on different different systems. Yeah.
To me, that the most
physically fascinating part is probably
the Jaguar. It was it's
without being too tangy cold,
you have two different CPS
and they have different architecture.
That mean if you do,
you compile it for the
Matera CPU, 68,000, and then
you want to use the
other CPU. You need to
use another instruction sets. So
essentially there is a compiler
part of the game for
one CPU, part of the
game for another CPU. And
they were loading instruction at
runtime and there was streaming,
there was streaming it, they
broke down the rendition, the
rendering engine in seven parts,
and then they were streaming
it as a, as the
frame was being rendered to
me, that's mind blowing what
they managed to achieve. Yeah.
The Jaguar in 1993 was,
I mean, 64 bit in
a commercial system was just
unheard of at this point.
Yeah. To me it felt
like it was a bit
of fake news that time
because 64 bit system where
I had held off at
the time, and I think
they played on the world
a little bit because the
burst was 64, the GPU
was 64, but the rest
of it was 16 and
sometimes eight. Yep. So maybe
that's why he broke the,
the beach wall because people
are, may finally realize the
city. It was, I really
do encourage people to check
the book out and pick
this up. It is one
of those books, like you
say, in the, in, in
the book, in fact that
you wanted it to be
a kind of book that
would be immediate, that you
could hold in one hand
and have some tea in
your other hand and just
sit there and explore. I
love that you spent almost
a hundred pages in just
appendix. I got to the
end and I said, Oh,
I'm not even at the
end. There's still there's dependencies
there's dot plans. There's the
original press releases there's interviews.
I mean, even the appendices
are almost a book in
themselves. Yeah. Again, it was
to give people more context,
the press release. So Tom
hall, what this press release
in January, 1993, when they had
nothing is a promiser texture
mappings. They provides diminished lighting.
They provide a bunch of
stuff that they hadn't done
and amazingly they delivered. Most
of them interviews are also
very interesting. And yeah, it
just gives a lot of
context. I maybe I'm very
detail oriented and that's why
I wrote 400 pages about
doom. But I, every time
somebody explained something to me,
I always find myself, I
screen question about why is
it done this way? And
it's always a matter of
context. Well, I appreciate you
coming on the show and
giving us even more context.
Thank you for inviting me.
Fantastic. I'm going to include
links to all of this
in the show notes. And
I really encourage you that
check out the game engine
black book, you can find
links to Amazon and Google
books up on Fabiano website.
You can find it at
Amazon or your local bookstore.
It is a joy. And
I would really encourage you
to check out the physical
version of the book. It
might cost more than the
PDF, but it's just a
gorgeous, you know, every page
has got some color or
some screenshot or some photograph.
It's a wonderful piece of
history. Thanks so much. Thank
you. This has been another
episode of Hanselminutes and we'll
see you again next week.
.